Please welcome from Apple Computer,
Robin Mikawa.
All right, so let's get started.
My name is Robin Mikawa.
I'm the manager of the type
engineering team at Apple Computer,
and I'm going to be here talking to you
today about the font APIs on Mac OS X.
So before I get started,
let me give you some background and an
explanation why are we all here today.
Why are fonts so important?
First and foremost,
the thing to remember about fonts
is that they're inextricably
tied together with text.
So if you're working with text,
you are working with fonts.
That's really the thing to remember.
Even if you're developing, let's say,
a simple application terminal emulator
that only uses one font at a time,
even nowadays, we provide the option for
users to set your preferences.
So in that case,
you'll have to deal with fonts and
being able to list it and allow
your users to set your preferences.
users to select the fonts.
Now, second, fonts have a long history.
They've evolved over time.
You've got all these
different formats available,
and users can and have found them
frustrating or difficult to use.
They're tricky.
Some have multiple files that
you have to carry across.
Others, well,
they're all different formats.
They're all different styles.
So what we've done on the system is
made it a lot easier for both the
users and you as developers to take
advantage of all these technologies.
And have consistent, reliable results,
make it really simple to work with fonts.
And so what you're going to get
out of today's session is how to
hook into the operating system and
really make your applications shine,
take up to the front of the pack,
you know,
become leaders in the world of fonts.
So just to give you a short overview
of what the presentation is,
I'm going to be talking about
just how to get started.
We're going to go right
into the meat of the matter.
We're going to show you
programming techniques,
tips and tricks, hints,
stuff that you shouldn't do.
And along the way,
you're going to get some
glimpses into the future,
what we're working on for Tiger,
as well as the roadmap for
longer term beyond Tiger.
So let's get started.
All right, as developers,
and I know exactly how you feel,
one of the first questions,
maybe not the first one,
but at least maybe the
second or third one,
is what APIs are available
and how should I use them?
What I've shown you here
is not only the layering,
but also what each component or
API set is really tailored for.
So to get started...
Up at the upper left, we've got Cocoa.
That is the application
framework for Mac OS X.
So if you're starting from scratch
or you have the option to switch
over to the Cocoa framework,
great.
You're going to get a lot
of this support for free.
Now,
if you want to do user interface text,
you've got HIToolbox.
That is the engine for drawing
user interface text as well as
measuring it and then handling all
the font support underneath it,
such as substituting the appropriate
fonts for different languages.
Now, underlying that is the
multilingual text engine.
What that does is it handles
the text editing and static text
behavior in HIToolbox itself.
There's also support for
handling a document-based model,
as well as doing a font user interface.
And so all of that allows you to
build essentially a very basic text
editing application just by using MLTE.
Now, underlying all of this is Atsui.
You've got Apple Type Services for
Unicode imaging.
People have asked me that before.
That's the official name.
What it is is the text
layout engine for Mac OS X.
It provides support for positioning
text in the right places,
handling the fonts, the graphics.
All of that stuff is abstracted
out from underneath you.
It also handles things
like justification,
font features, a lot of details that you
don't need to worry about.
But that you can hook in at that layer
if you just want to take advantage
of some parts of the system services.
Now, of course,
we've got the graphics system.
You've all heard about it.
It's Quartz.
[Transcript missing]
And then underlying all
of that is ATS itself.
That's Apple Type Services.
And that's the core
font system on Mac OS X.
And so what that gives you is a way to
hook into the way fonts are tracked,
detailed information about the fonts,
such as the metrics,
and it's really what serves
all the font information up to
the other parts of the system.
Now you'll notice there's one
component I've mentioned in
the past that isn't up here,
and that's Quick Draw.
Quick Draw as a tiger
has been deprecated.
Now don't panic.
It's not going away.
It's just we've marked it in
the interfaces and allowed you
to or let you know that we're
recommending that you move on to
other technologies such as Quartz.
We've made sure there's additional
support in there to at least match
or parallel the functionality
that you become used to.
There's going to be a discussion
about it later in the week
at the graphics session,
and you can listen in on
those at that point in time.
All right.
So next up,
as opposed to you as developers,
where do your users get started?
Where are they going to
see the user interface?
How do they get at the
fonts that they want?
Where are the commands?
How do they process the fonts?
And so one of the things we noticed
at Apple was that there really hasn't
been any guidelines for providing a
consistent user interface for fonts.
Think of it this way.
You've got the file menu.
Most of you know it's like, okay,
we've got a couple commands in
there that should be in there.
Edit menus.
In a similar way,
we're recommending that you move
to this model for your font menu.
Now, the key thing to remember here
is that first command up there,
show fonts.
That's really where we're going
to focus all of our new features,
our development,
our ease of use on the font panel.
That command shows and
hides the font panel.
Now,
we've made it really easy by building
in the support in Interface Builder.
You can just drag in the font menu.
The other items,
the other commands in there,
if you don't want to support them,
you can simply gray them out in the menu.
But you probably already have
commands like this spread out
somewhere in your menu structure.
The idea is so that users know exactly
where to go for at least their really
basic commands for dealing with fonts.
Now, going along with Quickdraw
being deprecated,
we're highly recommending that
you move away from the old font
and style menus that you used to
see in Quickdraw applications.
One of the key things is that
users have found it confusing.
Sometimes they wouldn't even use the
style menu because they couldn't get
at exactly the fonts that they wanted.
And so we've been working on ways
to make sure that that's much more
easy to do with the font panel.
All right, so that's the basics.
I just covered how to get started,
and let's just dive into the
rest of the presentation.
And I'll give you another
engineer on my team,
Nathan Taylor, to talk about them.
Thank you, Robin.
Hi, I'm Nathan Taylor.
I'm a software engineer with
the Type Engineering team,
and my responsibilities
include many of the APIs that
we're going to show you today.
So,
what I'm here to talk about are some of
the basic programming techniques that
you can implement in your applications
to bring it to the head of the pack,
as Robin said.
There are three basic items
we want you to take from this.
One, and foremost,
adopt the font panel in your application.
The font panel is the common
interface that we have
provided for accessing fonts.
It solves a lot of the previous
problems with font menus and adds
new functionality for the users.
It's also important to consider
this in providing a consistent user
interface for accessing fonts throughout
the system via your application.
The second item is to handle font
notifications in your application.
These notifications are provided to you
so that you can respond to changes to
the font registry that a user may enact.
And the third item up here,
store font references.
How should you store font references in
your document-- in the user documents
now and going forward with the system?
And I'll cover that a bit later.
Before I show you how to do this,
let me give you a brief demo
of what these things will
provide for your application.
What I'm going to do is
fire up a simple app here.
This is your basic
Hello World application written
with the Carbon frameworks.
And what I have here is a basic
window with some pretty plain text.
So now I'm going to
bring up the font panel.
And as you can see,
we have the font panel implemented
through a pretty standard fonts
menu according to the HI guidelines.
Now,
one of the first things your application
is going to need to do when a user
changes a font is respond to that and
actually change the font in the document.
So let me pick another font here,
Heffler Text 96 point,
and you can see that I've
implemented basic font changing
within this application.
So besides just the basic
support for the font panel,
which you can see right here,
there's also additional functionality
that the font panel provides
and you can choose to implement.
This is some nice features
such as font effects.
You can see I just implemented
this panel bar right here.
These effects provide things like shadow,
Colors, Underline, and Strike Through,
things that go above and beyond what
the font itself actually provides.
This information is provided
to your application through the
same mechanism that a lot of
the font panel information is.
In addition to the font effects,
there are also typographic
features that the user can access
through the typography panel.
As you can see, Heffler Text has a
bunch of features here,
and these include things
like ligature control.
This allows the user to have
extra control over the fonts
that support these features,
so they can turn off or turn on
some of the special ligatures
that a font might have.
For example,
our Zappfino font has this cool
ligature that when you type Zappfino,
it makes one single glyph for
the whole name of the font.
Now, the other thing to worry about
when implementing support for the
font panel is handling user focus.
The most common user focus change that
you need to be worried about and that
you won't probably forget is tracking
the user's position through a body of
text and through different style runs.
But one that is often forgotten is
tracking the change between windows.
So I just brought up a second
window here with another greeting.
And let me set the font
on that real quick.
Now, you see I have Cochin selected here.
If I change windows,
I've implemented here tracking of
the user focus between windows.
When I switch to the other window,
Heffler text is selected.
Let me do that again so you can see.
Now it's back to Cochin.
Finally, I mentioned font notifications.
And so let me turn on
notifications to my application.
I'm going to subscribe to them.
Now the demo app is listening for these.
And I'm going to be a user,
and I'm going to disable
a font using Font Book.
Let me go right after Cochran
there and turn it off.
At Hide Font Book,
you'll see that the demo application
has received a notification.
This is gratuitous.
You don't need to do
this in your application,
but the alert is here
to illustrate the point.
And as you can see,
this text has now changed.
It is now using a substitute font,
and I handled that substitution
in my notification callback so
that the text didn't disappear
in my simple text engine here.
And that about covers
it for the basic demo.
So let's go back to the slides
and dive right into how you can
implement this in your application.
So first, let's look at how to
adopt the Font Panel.
The first thing you need to
do is how do you get this font
panel in your application.
As Robin mentioned,
use Interface Builder for
Carbon or Cocoa and drag the
font menu into your menu bar.
In Cocoa, once you've done that,
it's pretty much free for
all the basic view classes.
In Carbon,
there's a little bit more work.
And so let me go into that.
There are three basic steps once you've
put the font panel in your application.
So you need to show and hide
the font panel on demand.
You need to handle user selection events.
And you need to handle user focus.
So showing and hiding the font
panel is pretty straightforward.
It's supported through the
standard event handler.
And if you create a show fonts menu item
and give it that SHFP tag I have here,
the standard command identifier
for the show/hide font panel,
you will get much of the support
to hide and show the font panel
with the selection through
the standard event handler.
You can also handle that event
yourself if you choose to.
Again, font selection events are
important because that's where
the user interacts with your
application through the font panel.
They'll select a font, a size,
and you should be able to handle
it and show it in the current
selection that they have.
And finally, as I showed,
user-focused tracking
between windows is important.
There's also another stage of
user-focused tracking that's important.
When the user has closed all windows or
just interim between switching windows,
you want to be able to clear
the state of the font panel.
And so I'll go into,
when I show you the code,
the simple steps to do that.
So handling font selection
is pretty straightforward.
The first thing you're going to
do is you're going to receive font
selection events from the font panel.
These events contain information
about the user's selection.
The first thing you're probably going to
want to pull out of here is the typeface.
That can be provided by family,
by typeface directly,
and it will probably also
include size information.
As I mentioned in the demo,
additional information such
as typographic features,
text effects, and even variation instance
information could be provided
through the event mechanism.
We've had many requests for
support for variation instances,
and it's now available through
the typographic features panel.
So let's take a look at how to implement
font selection in your application.
This is a really simple
event handler here.
And what I've got is I look for
the basic class of the event.
Then I check to make sure to see
if it's a font selection event,
at which point I select and extract the
parameters from the event that I need.
In this case,
I'm pulling out the ATSU font
ID and the ATSU font size.
I'll then pass those
on to my text engine,
apply them to the user's
current selection,
and then move on.
Here's the point where you'd also
want to pull out the extra parameters,
such as the type effects,
typographic features,
and anything else you
might want from this event.
Now, handling user focus is
another simple thing to do,
and let's take a look at it.
All right.
So this first block of code shows how
to handle user focus when a window
focus acquired event comes through.
The same code would be used when you're
switching between users' selections.
The basic flow here is
you extract your target.
This is where you want
your events to be sent.
Then you extract the current
text style from that target.
Finally,
calling set font info for selection,
you pass in the style and the target,
and that causes the font panel to select
the current style within the window.
When the focus from the window
is relinquished by the event
window focus relinquished,
You could call set font
info for selection.
Here, it's important to note,
you just pass in null for
the target and the style,
and that clears the
state of the font panel.
Additionally,
that instructs the font panel to
discontinue sending notifications
to the previous target.
All right, the next item we have to cover
is handling font notifications.
Font notifications are
pretty simple to do,
but they provide a lot
of functionality for you.
And let's look at what you can
get and what you can do with them.
The first thing to do with
notifications is you need to subscribe.
And you do this by creating a callback
and using the appropriate API.
Subscribe that callback to notifications.
In your callback,
it's important that you do
the work that you need to do.
This could involve updating documents,
like I did in the demo,
with custom font substitution.
Or if you have a standard
font menu or font list,
updating that.
It's really important to track the
notifications so that a user doesn't have
to quit and relaunch your application to
see changes they made to the font system.
Other things you can do with font
notifications are you can notify the
system of changes you've made to the
font directories or the registry.
There's a simple API to
notify the system of changes,
and you'll want to do this if you're
installing fonts from an installer
application or some installer
block in your code that drops
fonts in the standard directory.
And finally, the little bit more
interesting option you can do,
and it interacts with some
of the other font management
APIs that we have available,
is to batch your processing events.
Things like ATS Font Activate and
Deactivate are lengthy operations,
and they trigger automatic notifications
to anybody who has subscribed.
If you're doing a lot
of these in sequence,
you'll generate a lot of
events sent to anybody who's
subscribing to notifications,
which could be a performance issue.
What you can do is batch
your operation by passing the
Do Not Notify flag to those APIs,
and at the end of your batch operation,
call the same ATS Font Notify API to
tell everybody that you're done
and that something has changed.
So let's see how to do a basic
subscription to font notifications.
What I've done here is I have
a very simple callback.
Within the braces, you would put the code
that you want to run.
And for brevity, I kind of left mine out.
Then, register it with the system.
You can register your notification
with the system using the
API ATS Font Notification Subscribe,
and you pass in your callback,
and you get back a
notification reference.
It's possible to register
multiple notifications,
and you would want to
hang on to the references,
especially if you want to unsubscribe
them like I do at the bottom.
When unsubscribing,
you pass in the notification reference,
and then you no longer will receive
notifications for the callback
that's attached to that reference.
You can do this in the case where
you've got multiple functionality,
but only some of it needs to be
maintained through a certain time period.
So you set up a bunch of callbacks and
turn one off when you no longer need it.
Anything else you have when
your application terminates will
automatically be unsubscribed.
All right,
the last item I have to cover is how to
store font references in your document.
Font references are important
because a user wants to open their
documents that they previously
saved and see it coming back just as
they saved it with the correct fonts
and the correct style information.
So what are the best ways for
you to store font references?
I've got three here,
and one of them is new for Tiger.
So let's start with that one.
Use the NS Font Descriptor class
available from Cocoa if you can.
This provides extended
functionality for specifying fonts.
It allows you to specify fonts
more precisely if you desire,
and also allows us to be more flexible
with providing fonts for your request.
There are three simple
steps to using these.
First, you would create a font descriptor
with some font attributes.
It could be as simple as a font name.
Then to save it,
you'll extract the attributes
from the font descriptor,
which returns a dictionary,
which you can flatten and save into your
document using the standard methods.
Finally, upon opening the document,
you'll create the NS font from this
font descriptor and display it,
and your user will be happy.
The other methods that
you've seen before,
if you've been at any of
these previous sessions,
are use the PostScript name.
If you can't adopt font descriptors,
the PostScript name is
the next best thing.
It's the standard reference
mechanism in Cocoa and Quartz up to
this point for referencing fonts.
And if you happen to have a
QuickDraw-based application,
you may still need to store the
family name and style information.
All right,
so let's take a look at some quick code
snippets for handling font descriptors.
All right.
I've got three blocks here.
The first block,
I create a font descriptor
by a create with name.
This name is simply the PostScript name.
Then, in the second block,
I extract the font attributes.
This returns, as you can see,
an NSDictionary.
I then can save that to my file and
then bring it back and create a font
after unarchiving the dictionary,
creating a descriptor
from that dictionary,
and then creating an NS font with
font with descriptor and size.
At this point, the document is ready to
display and the user is happy.
All right, that about wraps it up for me,
so I'll have Robin come back
on stage to give you some more
advanced programming techniques
to customize your applications.
Thank you.
So I'm back.
Essentially,
you can see what I'm going to talk
about for the rest of the session,
which is even more
programming techniques.
So hang in there.
I'm going to try and make
this as fun as possible.
Now,
one of the key things I thought about
when I was looking over this session was,
what are the sorts of things I want
to hear about if I were just a generic
developer who did something with fonts?
And here's something that's
really important for you is,
in addition to the basic stuff
we've just described up above,
what you can get out of the system
is hooking into it at the right
level and customizing the way font
handling works in your application.
So, again, we're giving you
recommendations and guidelines,
but if you want to do your own
custom support or if you want to make
something slightly different that makes
things even better for your users,
you can do it.
And so that includes things
like the user interface,
looking at fonts in detail
so you can implement,
let's say, your own custom text engine,
handling font management in your own way,
or implementing a font utility,
just like Font Book.
You can also hook into the graphics
system or the way fonts are processed,
either for printing or
for rendering on screen.
And then finally,
there's a new feature that I'll go into
later that I'm pretty excited about,
you'll probably notice it later,
is scripting for font management.
And that lets your users
customize the way fonts work for
them on the operating system.
So before I do that,
let me go in and give you a quick
demo that shows you how you might want
to customize some of these features.
All right,
so I'll bring up Font Book here.
And I've implemented a really simple,
basic application that shows you how
you can customize the user interface.
So like we've said,
we recommend using the Font Panel.
But if you want to do
something different,
let's say a font menu that
does pretty much exactly the
same thing as the Font Panel,
Then I've done it here.
If you look at this,
you can see that it's got all the
standard collections in there.
Within them, they've got all the contents
that you would get in a
Carbon or Cocoa application
that's adopted the font panel.
These are all the standard collections.
In fact,
I've shown it on the side with Font Book,
so you can see that they're
actually exactly the same.
Now another thing that we've done on
Tiger that's new that takes advantage
of the font system and extracts
information out of it and puts it
up on screen in a slightly different
way is Apple System Profiler.
Let me blow this up a little
bit so you can see it.
And what we've done is we've added
a fonts plugin for System Profiler
that essentially lists all the
fonts available on your system,
extracts different bits of
information about the font,
and then splashes it up on screen
or in the System Profiler app so
you can actually see and get a
lot of interesting information
that's in the fonts themselves.
So you can see this is Zapfino.
I've got where it's located,
whether or not it's enabled,
and then all kinds of information
about the font itself that's actually
available to you as developers.
That's my demo, real quick and short.
And moving back to the presentation,
What I'm going to go over
next is all of these items.
I'll go through them real quick.
If you can tell,
I can speak pretty quickly.
I'll try and make sure I don't
run everything together and blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah,
so you can understand me.
But essentially,
customizing the user interface.
First off, I'm going to talk about Cocoa,
and then I'm going to talk
about another component,
MLTE.
So with Cocoa,
what we've got here is it parallels
the implementation or the additional
work you might need to do that
Nathan described for Carbon.
And this is important if
you're writing a custom view.
All of the standard text views,
the text fields,
they handle the font panel automatically.
But let's say you're writing a subclass
of table view or the outline view,
which don't inherently
support the font panel.
This is how you go about doing it.
And it's just two slides worth of steps.
It's really easy.
So first of all, in Cocoa,
just the general thing,
if you're dealing with fonts,
most likely you're going to have to get
an instance of the shared font manager.
This is the hub of getting
all your font services.
Now once you've got your hands on that,
you can send a notification whenever your
current selection in your text object,
your view, changes,
or when you become first responder.
Those are the two places where
you'd actually want to do it.
And so you simply send this command
and indicate the font and whether
or not it's a multiple selection.
That's one part of the communication.
The second half is just about as simple.
So what happens here is that,
like I said, standard text views
automatically do this for you.
But if you want,
you can respond to changes in
the font panel or the font user
interface in the font menu.
The font manager will send a
notification up the responder chain.
All you have to do is listen
to the default message.
In this case,
I've implemented a basic delegate method.
Change font is the message or the action
message that you need to respond to.
Within that function,
all you need to do is pull
out your current selection.
I've got a really simple example here.
It's only one font for the object,
but you can do something more complex,
as you can imagine.
I pull that out.
It's my old font.
I send it back to the font manager
to modify it and make that match
exactly what the user has selected,
whatever actions the user has done
in the font panel or the font menu.
It sends me back a new
instance of an NSFont object.
which then I can apply to my text view.
That's it.
So you notice it's actually in
parallel with what Nathan described.
You listen in to the messages and you
send notifications out to communicate
the information to the font panel.
Now, in MLTE,
In the past,
you've had to do what Nathan described
as with any Carbon application.
But new for Tiger,
we've made it even simpler.
All you have to do now
is one line of code,
or in my case, four lines of code.
Essentially,
there's a new API available to
enable support in a text extension,
which is the old name for MLT,
text object.
And so, in essence,
I've created a text object.
It could be either a
document or a text field.
indicate that you want it to listen
and support the standard font commands.
That's it.
You're done.
All of that communication back and forth,
updating the text object itself,
all of that's handled
automatically for you on Tiger.
So that was a pretty boring slide,
but it's really simple.
indicate that you want it to listen
and support the standard font commands.
That's it.
You're done.
All of that communication back and forth,
updating the text object itself,
all of that's handled
automatically for you on Tiger.
So that was a pretty boring slide,
but it's really simple.
Now I've got some sample code here,
but let me give you
just a real quick hint.
When you're dealing with fonts
and you want to get information,
there's APIs available at pretty much
all the layers that I described earlier.
Cocoa, Atsui, ATS.
In all of those,
the recommendation is whichever one
you've chosen to work at primarily,
let's say you're a Cocoa application,
a lot of the APIs there support
the same level of support for
accessing font information.
Try and use it at that level.
If you need to,
you can dip down lower into the
deeper layers as you need to.
So at the very bottom, of course,
you've got ATS.
And in this case,
what I've done is I want to
get access to every single font
on the system in the registry.
Actually, let me strike that.
Every single font my app can see.
In fact, I'll talk about this next.
There's some options you can set
to define the context and the scope
of an enumeration or a listing.
So in this case,
I create an iterator object.
I pass that iterator
object to a function,
ATS font iterator next,
that basically steps through
every single font on the system
that matches my criteria,
returns a standard font ref that I can
then use later to access information.
And I'll go into that in a
little bit more detail later.
Once I'm done with the
iteration or the enumeration,
I'll release the iterator
object and I can move on.
In fact,
that's exactly what I'll do next.
Thank you.
All right,
so I mentioned context and scope.
A lot of people tend
to ask this question,
what the heck is that?
There's two options,
I gotta mess with it.
The simplest way to look
at it is in this diagram,
you'll see the local unrestricted
combination of options really
matches what I just described.
It's really all the fonts that your
app should be able to use and see.
Now, within that set,
you've got more restricted sets.
One is the local restricted,
local context,
which is really your local application,
restricted to just those fonts that
your application owns and manages
and has entered into the system.
So they're like
application-specific fonts.
Global restricted is the global space.
It's all the shared fonts,
and those fonts managed
by the system itself.
Put those together,
and you get all the fonts that you
can see and use within your app.
There's one more combination,
the fourth one,
which is global unrestricted,
which we don't recommend you use,
mainly because if you take this image,
duplicate it essentially with
all the processes or all the
applications in the system,
It'll give you all those fonts,
every single font.
And so the key thing here to remember
is you might get your hands on
some fonts that you don't have,
you know, you can't use.
Basically,
they're owned by somebody else.
All right,
so once you get your hands on a font ref,
what can you do with it?
Here's one example.
There's support at various layers.
NSFont has the support.
ATS also has the support.
You can access metrics
information about the fonts.
And also, in some cases,
information about individual
glyphs within the fonts.
And so you've got the advance,
you've got line information,
bounding recs,
and additional information,
including like the italic angle.
So again, the recommendation is use those
APIs at the same level as the other
APIs you're using in your application.
Now another thing.
Okay, so customizing font management
is the next section.
What's that mean?
Well,
let me give you a little background.
Font management, when I talk about it,
we're talking about...
Component-wise, it's the shared font
registry on the system.
It's the support available
from Mac OS X that goes out
and finds all the fonts.
It tracks information such as
what users can see the fonts,
what processes can use and see the fonts,
and access privileges,
as well as where the fonts are located.
This font database or font
registry handles the standard
file system domain ordering.
This is all the different locations.
So just to go through it real quickly,
first off,
the system will look in the user domain
or your home directory's font library.
Next up, the local domain,
which is the library fonts that's
shared across the particular
computer between different users
as well as different applications.
You've got the network fonts and
then the system critical fonts
that you're not supposed to touch.
And then finally,
it's not a standard file system domain,
but we support it.
The classic environment,
which doesn't need to be running,
by the way.
All you have to do is register
it with system preferences.
We'll look inside its system folder
and give you back all those fonts also.
So the way you can take advantage
of this is you can add fonts or
remove fonts in that registry.
You can modify the contents.
The way you would do it
is using this function.
ATS Font Activate from
File Specification is one example.
It uses a standard file spec.
This is obviously an older API.
Point it at your font or
your directory of fonts.
Indicate.
Now, this is why we had different
context and scope options.
We reused that one so you can
register the fonts locally
within your application.
I've also specified that
I don't know what the format is,
so please figure it out for me.
And that's a really good
example where the system,
you can leverage it and still provide
custom support because it handles
all of the details of the different
formats and activates them accordingly.
You get a container object back.
Whenever you want to,
you can remove those fonts from
the system using that container.
That's it.
All right,
now this is something really cool.
It's new.
In the past, we've told you if you have
an application-specific font,
you need to do that stuff
in the previous slide.
Well, now on Tiger,
all you have to do is stuff your font
somewhere in your application bundle,
put a pointer to it in
the Info.plist file,
and then you're done.
Everything else is taken care of for you.
So the system will automatically
register those fonts with itself
when your application is launched,
and then remove those fonts when
your application shuts down.
And again, the key that you'll want
to use is right up there,
ATS Application Fonts Path.
Now another thing is in
the demo I showed you,
I accessed the system
support for collections.
And the way this works,
just a quick review,
is it lets users filter down the font
list to something more manageable.
And so when you do that, we actually--
The way you can support
it is hooking into Cocoa.
We also have C callable equivalents
for getting at this support.
What we have here right now is the
first block of code is just getting a
list of all the collections available.
It's essentially an array of NSStrings.
From that, you can actually modify or
add additional collections.
You can add and remove them.
I don't show it here,
but I do show how you can
modify the contents one or
create a new one on your own.
There's a font geek in my group.
I won't mention their name,
but I happen to install my fonts and
group them according to different
styles and categories historically.
Venetian,
Gurali are two different subclasses of,
or subgroups of the
serif old style category.
So what I want to do here in this example
is essentially take all the descriptors,
Side note, every collection consists
of font descriptors,
as Nathan mentioned earlier.
These are essentially a way to
describe or criteria that describe
one or more fonts together.
So again, my collection,
I extract all the descriptors out of it,
stick it in an array.
Then I stuff in some more.
I pull them out of the
Guraldi collection,
stuff them into that array,
and then I add all of those font
descriptors to my new collection that
I referenced by the name Serif Old Style.
Simple as that.
And again,
there's C callable equivalents that
you can use in the Carbon framework.
All right.
So we've got font processing.
What does that mean for you?
I think I mentioned it earlier.
They're essentially a way for
you to hook into the graphics
system or the printing system.
What the rasterizers do,
they're actually modular
components on the system.
They take the raw font data,
they run through it,
and they spit out graphics
or print-related data.
That includes the bitmaps, the outlines.
It also converts the font data from
what you see on disk to something
that can be embedded within a
PostScript document or PDF files.
In fact, that's exactly what the printing
system on Mac OS X uses.
It uses this level of support.
So if you want to hook into it,
you can take advantage of that now.
The rasterizers also hide all of the
details of the different formats for you.
So we've got TrueType
in all its variants.
OpenType is actually a new format
package that is supported by
Microsoft and Adobe and Mac OS X.
We also handle PostScript,
both the Type 1 and the OpenType flavors.
So all of that detail is hidden away from
you so you don't have to worry about it,
but still take advantage
of the general features.
Now, here's one example of doing that.
I'm going to give you two.
I'll touch on printing next.
But in this case,
I'm using the text layout system itself.
I'm using its character-to-glyph
conversion support in the initial block.
Essentially, I'm using this API.
Okay, I'll let you read it out loud.
By the way,
I've done worse in my history.
Essentially,
it takes a text layout object
that stores the text stream,
the text information.
It takes those character codes,
converts them over to a
list of glyph records.
I've got a glyph data array and account.
One thing to note is that character
codes don't necessarily map to glyph IDs,
which are actually the representation
of the actual shapes within a font.
So a good example of this is a ligature.
If you have F, let's say F and L in
your character stream,
when you apply it to a
font or apply a font to it,
it might get merged into one ligature,
one glyph.
That's the FL ligature itself.
And so you can take advantage
of the text system to do that
conversion for you in a standard way.
Now, the second block of code shows
you how you can actually get
that graphics data I mentioned.
One of the things you can use it for is,
let's say you've got some text,
you want to turn it into
graphics data that you want to
send straight to the printer,
you want to modify it,
you want to morph it into
a different graphic shape,
put polka dots on it for all I know.
So in order to do this,
you go through those
glyph records one by one,
grab the relevant information,
in this case,
the style object and the glyph ID.
And what's really
interesting here is that,
by the way,
I'm converting this to cubic data,
cubic paths.
You can also convert it to another form,
quadratic curves.
But in this case,
I've got four standard operations
that define the shape of the glyph.
And so one would be moving
to a particular point.
Another one would be
drawing a straight line.
Another one might be drawing a curve.
And the last one is drawing or
indicating the end of the path.
And so all of these
functions you can define,
pass it into the Atsugecubic
glyph pass function.
It will basically record
or play back those glyphs,
allow you to record that information in
a buffer and process it however you want.
You can send it straight down to a disk,
whatever you choose to.
All right.
So I mentioned printing support.
Essentially this is a
new feature in Tiger.
Now we still highly recommend
you let the printing system do
as much of the work as possible.
But if you were using instead of,
let's say, the PDF rendering path,
which is recommended,
if you're using the old LaserWriter
8 compatibility print support
to do post script rendering
or post script downloads.
This lets you take advantage
of newer support to actually
just get that font data to do it
to manipulate in your own way.
And so we allow you to generate
font subsets from a standard Quartz
font reference using the function,
well, CG font create PostScript subset.
You can indicate what the output format
should be and then an array of glyphs,
CG glyph IDs.
These are just the same as
those glyph IDs I mentioned
earlier in the Atsui example.
If you pass in null for the array,
it'll just give you every
single glyph in the font,
or you can indicate specific
glyphs as you choose.
Once you've done that,
it will return all that
data back in a CF package,
a core foundation data package,
which then you can use the standard
functions in core foundation to
parse and process however you want,
including sending it to a disk or
downloading it straight to a printer.
Okay, so at this layer,
when you're working on it,
you have to be more aware of performance.
And so here's some tips and hints.
When you're working in Atsui,
try and reuse objects
as much as possible.
Specifically for fonts,
pre-allocate and reuse
the Atsu style objects.
This allows you to use the
caching system available in Atsui,
and it basically minimizes the
amount of memory allocations
and reuse of system resources.
Also, use the Quartz graphics context
as much as possible when you're
working directly with Atsui.
This is because Atsui has
been optimized for Quartz.
If you're using an older, let's say,
Quick Draw graphics port,
there's some conversion that's needed
that slows things down potentially.
Now, when you're working in Quartz,
the same principles tend to apply.
Try and reuse the CG font
refs as much as possible,
the Quartz font references.
The reason for this is even though
you might have the same font
reference pointing at the same font,
let's say, Times,
Now, when you're working in Quartz,
the same principles tend to apply.
Try and reuse the CG font
refs as much as possible,
the Quartz font references.
The reason for this is even though
you might have the same font
reference pointing at the same font,
let's say Times,
Now, when you're working in Quartz,
the same principles tend to apply.
Try and reuse the CG font
refs as much as possible,
the Quartz font references.
The reason for this is even though
you might have the same font
reference pointing at the same font,
let's say Times,
with an example of what we've
done on Mac OS X for Tiger.
So right now, I've got Font Book showing.
If you didn't notice earlier,
take a look here.
I've got a standard
AppleScript menu now available.
I'll just open up the script folder.
And I've got two scripts there available.
In fact, let me just pull up one using
Script Editor to show you that
it is actually AppleScript.
All right.
So one of the key
things to remember here,
you can manipulate any object that
Font Book itself can see and handle.
So in this particular case,
I'm just showing you the
code so you get a sense of,
yeah, this is real code.
But just a quick summary of it is,
it's creating a new
collection named Bold,
and then it's asking all the typefaces
in Font Book for every entry in
there that might match the name Bold.
Pulls those out and stuffs
them into the new collection
I just created called Bold.
Now, instead of running it
from within Script Editor,
let me run it straight from Font Book.
Now, the thing to remember is watch the
Collections pane on the left-hand side.
You're going to see a new
collection show up there pretty
much instantaneously called Bold.
It contains
[Transcript missing]
I've implemented another Apple script.
It's really cool.
I actually hugged the engineer
when he showed me this,
mainly because...
I'll let it run.
I used to have to do this by hand.
Okay?
So I'd go in and I'd have to test it.
I'd have to create the sample.
Ugh, I hated it.
Well, it's done.
Well, yes, it's done now.
So essentially, I created a document with
87 different families,
183 typefaces, all using AppleScript.
And the key thing to remember
here is that not only is
Font Book itself AppleScripted,
but you can interact or your users can
interact with other applications that
support AppleScript just as easily.
Okay, so that's the demo.
Real quick.
And getting back to the presentation,
here's just the final summary
of what the scripting support
that's new for Tiger consists of.
It's a standard Apple script
dictionary in Font Book.
It has a number of classes and elements
that you can take advantage of,
including the domains
I described earlier,
collections themselves,
as well as containers.
And you can also manipulate or look
at the font families and typefaces.
Within those,
each of them has a bunch of different
properties that you can check out,
but the name is definitely one of them,
whether or not that font
or collection is enabled.
And then you can manipulate them using
the standard AppleScript commands,
like add and remove,
to remove items from a container object,
let's say fonts from a collection.
You can also delete objects wholesale.
So that's new for Tiger.
It's really exciting.
I know some of you have
asked us in the past for it.
We got it done.
All right,
so that wraps up the presentation.
Let me just give you an overall summary.
Essentially, adopt the font panel.
If anything, please try to do that.
Let the system do the work for you.
That's really the key message here.
That's where we're going
to put a lot of support in.
You can take advantage
of it by just doing that.
Now, if you want to customize support,
you can do it.
Like I described,
there's a bunch of different things
you can do with the operating system,
a bunch of different APIs available.
You can customize the way fonts
work within your application
to match your users' needs.
Now, if you have any questions,
you can contact our evangelist,
Xavier Legro.
And you can also refer to
the documentation on the
Apple Developer Connection website.
And this just touches on a couple
of the items I've discussed today.
I kind of went everywhere.